[OSDOCS-15258] Adds evpn-udn docs (#109142)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-bgp-evpn-about.adoc

Reviewer: This note is redundant since it is already in the "About route advertisements" documentation that you are referencing, I would remove.

* Route advertisements must be enabled in the OVN-Kubernetes configuration so that `RouteAdvertisements` CRs can associate fabric-facing FRR configuration with primary CUDNs that use EVPN transport.

You configure BGP neighbors, address families, and related policies in `FRRConfiguration` CRs. You then use `RouteAdvertisements` to tie those configurations to `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` objects that are labeled or selected according to your design.

Plan BGP sessions to the underlay or route reflectors, typically on every node that participates, before you rely on EVPN reachability.

[id="bgp-evpn-gateway-mode_{context}"]
== Gateway mode and node forwarding

EVPN for primary CUDNs is supported when the cluster uses local gateway mode. The `spec.defaultNetwork.ovnKubernetesConfig.gatewayConfig.routingViaHost` field must be `true` in the `Network` Operator API. Invalid combinations are rejected through resource status conditions.

[id="bgp-evpn-supported-platforms_{context}"]
== Supported platforms

> BGP EVPN for primary CUDNs is intended for on-premises deployments where nodes peer with an external BGP EVPN fabric. Bare-metal clusters are the common case.

Author: Said [here](https://github.com/ovn-kubernetes/ovn-kubernetes/blob/4568650412f85cdcf7671c74d2e9b3bb67d3b366/docs/okeps/okep-5088-evpn.md#extending-udns-into-the-provider-network-via-evpn:~:text=Support%20for%20EVPN%20in%20on%2Dprem%20deployments%20only.) and in the slide deck, but this could be moved to Limitations if we don't want another section.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/advanced_networking/bgp_evpn_udn/about-bgp-evpn-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-bgp-evpn-about_{context}"]
= Overview of BGP EVPN with OVN-Kubernetes

[role="_abstract"]

> Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Ethernet Virtual Private Networking (EVPN) is a standards-based control-plane that exchanges layer 2 and layer 3 overlay network reachability within the data center. Enabling this feature on {product-title} allows a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) overlay network to use the EVPN control plane for deeper integration with the data center network.

Reviewer 2: Pointless grammar nit but: I get hyphenating standards-based because it's a compound adjective preceding the phrase it modifies, but should control plane also be hyphenated here? My instinct is no but I could be forgetting about some grammar rule:

```suggestion
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Ethernet Virtual Private Networking (EVPN) is a standards-based control plane that exchanges layer 2 and layer 3 overlay network reachability within the data center. Enabling this feature on {product-title} allows a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) overlay network to use the EVPN control plane for deeper integration with the data center network.
```

Before EVPN support for primary cluster user-defined networks (CUDNs), VRF-lite was the only way to advertise CUDNs into one or more Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) tables while keeping them isolated on the network. However, that approach required a VLAN interface per VRF and a separate BGP session for each VRF.

BGP EVPN simplifies that workflow: you avoid extra VLAN interfaces and per-VRF BGP sessions by using a single multiprotocol BGP (MP-BGP) session toward the fabric.

> EVPN defines two VPN types that you can deploy with primary CUDNs when you attach the overlay to the fabric:

Reviewer 2: Would it be worth adding a little more here to more explicitly connect this sentence to the description list?

```suggestion
EVPN defines the following two VPN types that you can deploy with primary CUDNs when you attach the overlay to the fabric:
```

.BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs feature compatibility
[cols="1a,1a",options="header"]
|===
^| Network feature ^| Supported

^| Egress firewall
^| Supported

^| Egress QoS
^| Supported

^| Network QoS
^| Supported

^| Network Policy
^| Supported

^| Services (Cluster IP)
^| Supported

^| Services (NodePort, External IP, LoadBalancer)
^| Limited^[1]^

^| Multicast (MAC-VRF)
^| Supported

^| Multicast (IP-VRF)
^| Unsupported

^| Multiple External Gateways (MEG)
^| Unsupported

^| EgressIP
^| Unsupported

^| Egress Service
^| Unsupported

^| IPsec
^| Unsupported

|===
--
. For `Service` objects (NodePort, External IP, and LoadBalancer), the node IP, external IP, and LoadBalancer IP must be reachable on the EVPN fabric at the appropriate cluster nodes. OVN-Kubernetes does not advertise those addresses onto the fabric. Service traffic behaves normally when the fabric delivers packets to the nodes.
--

[id="bgp-evpn-limitations_{context}"]
== Limitations

The following limitations apply to BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs:

* BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs is supported only on bare-metal clusters.

> * BGP EVPN with CUDNs is only supported in local gateway mode.

Reviewer: oh actually this
```
* BGP EVPN with CUDNs is only supported in local gateway mode.
```
 equates to [this](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/109142/changes#diff-f6fcf231f89fab9439d6b4ed3d5fda69ca2dec7f28f86599403ae89b0d926e97R19) 
```
* You have set `gatewayConfig.routingViaHost` to `true` and `gatewayConfig.ipForwarding` to `Global` in the Cluster Network Operator configuration. BGP EVPN for primary CUDNs is only supported with this gateway configuration. For more information, see "Configuring a gateway".
```
but I am not sure if `local gateway mode` is valid terminology in OCP docs. You might want to rephrase here.

Author: Ya no worries. Rephrased.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/advanced_networking/bgp_evpn_udn/about-bgp-evpn-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-bgp-evpn-about_{context}"]
= Overview of BGP EVPN with OVN-Kubernetes

[role="_abstract"]

> Enabling Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) capability on {product-title} exposes primary `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) custom resources (CRs) (layer 2 and layer 3) externally through a VPN to other entities inside or outside of the cluster, providing an industry-standardized way to achieve network segmentation between sites.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Ethernet Virtual Private Networking (EVPN) is a standards-based control-plane that exchanges Layer 2 and Layer 3 overlay network reachability within the datacenter. Enabling this on {product-title} enables a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) - an overlay network - to use this control plane allowing for a deeper integration into the data center network.
```

Saying "expose a network through a VPN" isn't quite right.

Reviewer: I suggested this picking up on the working used in the upstream [okep](https://github.com/ovn-kubernetes/ovn-kubernetes/blob/aa70be85ea483d8649b0d91110b5379f7e17acec/docs/okeps/okep-5088-evpn.md?plain=1#L8) which I was not completely happy about but at least aligned.

Suggestion looks good although sounded a bit redundant on the wording with ` Enabling this on {product-title} enables`, maybe `Once enabled on {product-title}, a ClusterUserDefinedNetwork (CUDN) leverages this control plane to provide deeper integration into the data center network.`, AI sponsored.

Author: @jcaamano @dave-tucker I revised this as: 

```suggestion
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Ethernet Virtual Private Networking (EVPN) is a standards-based control-plane that exchanges layer 2 and layer 3 overlay network reachability within the datacenter. Enabling this feature on {product-title} allows a `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) overlay network to use the EVPN control plane for deeper integration with the data center network.
```

wdyt?

Reviewer 3: sgtm

> Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) EVPN integration with primary CUDNs aligns tenant segmentation with existing BGP operations and reduces reliance on per-node static route configuration on hosts when you combine EVPN with route advertisements and local gateway mode. You can use BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs to deploy either VPN type that EVPN defines:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prior to introducing EVPN support, VRF-lite was the only way to advertise a CUDNs into one or more Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) tables, keeping them isolated on the network, however this required creating a VLAN interface per-VRF and establishing a new BGP session per-VRF.
BGP EVPN makes this process much simpler, requiring no additional configuration, and uses only a single multi-protocol BGP session```

Author: Slight alteration, this way we keep the MAC-VRF and IP-VRF bullet points below. 

```suggestion
Prior to EVPN support for primary cluster user-defined networks (CUDNs), VRF-lite was the only way to advertise CUDNs into one or more Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) tables while keeping them isolated on the network. However, that approach required a VLAN interface per VRF and a separate BGP session for each VRF.

BGP EVPN simplifies that workflow: you avoid extra VLAN interfaces and per-VRF BGP sessions by using a single multiprotocol BGP (MP-BGP) session toward the fabric.

EVPN defines two VPN types that you can deploy with primary CUDNs when you attach the overlay to the fabric:
```

Reviewer 3: 👍

OVN-Kubernetes drives EVPN integration with FRR-K8s: FRR establishes BGP EVPN sessions toward your fabric, while OVN-Kubernetes programs overlay and underlay state for the selected CUDNs. A `VTEP` custom resource defines how the cluster exposes virtual tunnel endpoints (VTEPs) for EVPN encapsulation, and `RouteAdvertisements` objects select which primary CUDNs are advertised and which FRR configuration to use.

[NOTE]

> ====

Reviewer: I don't think this note is necessary. It is only relevant in the section where it already exists: "About BGP routing". 

What I think we should do is reference the RouteAdvertisements documentation since EVPN builds on top of it

Something like
```
... This feature requires and builds on top of the OVN-Kubernetes RouteAdvertisements feature. For more information, see Chapter 7 RouteAdvertisements.

```

> ====

Author: Sure. Done.

> When you enable EVPN transport on a primary CUDN, VXLAN replaces Geneve as the overlay for traffic carried over the EVPN fabric. That avoids the double-encapsulation overhead of running Geneve inside an EVPN fabric. FRR acts as the BGP EVPN control plane and integrates with Linux network devices to provide the data plane.

Reviewer 3: We're implementing EVPN-VXLAN. You shouldn't mention Geneve here as it's confusing to the reader.

Reviewer: Kinda agree, we might be introducing an implementation issue that the user should not be exposed to, as avoiding the double-encapsulation is just the natural outcome of the feature.

Author: @dave-tucker @jcaamano Do we want it removed entirely, or just updated to something like..

```suggestion
Enabling EVPN transport on a primary cluster user-defined network (CUDN) implements EVPN-VXLAN. FRR acts as the BGP EVPN control plane and integrates with Linux network devices to provide the data plane.

```

Reviewer: EVPN using VXLAN overlay?

====

[id="bgp-evpn-primary-use-cases_{context}"]
== BGP EVPN with primary CUDN use cases

Common reasons to deploy BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs include the following:

Fabric integration:: Map tenant networks to the same route-target and VRF semantics that you already use on an external BGP EVPN fabric.

Layer 2 stretch for mobility:: Extend a layer 2 segment into the cluster so that virtual machines or pods can keep addresses stable. EVPN MAC mobility can help when workloads move between nodes.

> Simpler attachment than per-node local wiring:: Reduce dependence on host-specific local attachment patterns when the fabric can carry many tenant VNIs over shared uplinks.

Author: Essentially saying that VRF-Lite is cumbersome to configure and deal with, as said [here](https://github.com/ovn-kubernetes/ovn-kubernetes/blob/4568650412f85cdcf7671c74d2e9b3bb67d3b366/docs/okeps/okep-5088-evpn.md#extending-udns-into-the-provider-network-via-evpn:~:text=While%20VRF%2DLite,this%20fabric%20directly.). The sentence itself is basically saying that a user wants to reduce double encapsulation and integrate directly with EVPN. "Shared uplinks" is doing a LOT of heavy lifting here. Might need to change.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/advanced_networking/bgp_evpn_udn/about-bgp-evpn-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-bgp-evpn-about_{context}"]
= Overview of BGP EVPN with OVN-Kubernetes

[role="_abstract"]
Enabling Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) capability on {product-title} exposes primary `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) custom resources (CRs) (layer 2 and layer 3) externally through a VPN to other entities inside or outside of the cluster, providing an industry-standardized way to achieve network segmentation between sites.

Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) EVPN integration with primary CUDNs aligns tenant segmentation with existing BGP operations and reduces reliance on per-node static route configuration on hosts when you combine EVPN with route advertisements and local gateway mode. You can use BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs to deploy either VPN type that EVPN defines:

> EVPN on primary CUDNs requires and builds on the OVN-Kubernetes route advertisements feature. You use `RouteAdvertisements` custom resources to associate fabric-facing FRR configuration with labeled primary CUDNs that use EVPN transport. For more information, see "About route advertisements".

Reviewer: This is misplaced: it breaks the flow of the previous paragraph leading to the MAC-VRF/IP-VRF bullets below.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/advanced_networking/bgp_evpn_udn/about-bgp-evpn-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-bgp-evpn-about_{context}"]
= Overview of BGP EVPN with OVN-Kubernetes

[role="_abstract"]
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) extends BGP with address families that distribute Ethernet and IP VPN routes, such as MAC reachability in a MAC-VRF (layer 2) and IP prefixes in an IP-VRF (layer 3). 

With the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin on {product-title}, you can attach primary cluster user-defined networks (CUDNs) to an external EVPN fabric. This integration lets you extend segmentation and reachability for tenant namespaces beyond the cluster boundary by using the same BGP-based standards as your physical or virtual network infrastructure.

[NOTE]
====

> For primary CUDNs that use EVPN transport, traffic carried over the EVPN fabric typically uses VXLAN encapsulation rather than the Geneve overlay that OVN-Kubernetes commonly uses for east-west traffic on layer 2 user-defined networks without EVPN. The cluster default pod network is not modeled as an EVPN VPN in this design; EVPN applies to primary CUDNs that you configure for EVPN.

Reviewer: `typically` is a bit of a weak statement. It will use VXLAN instead of Geneve.

Author: FIxed.

Multicast:: Multicast in a MAC-VRF (layer 2) context is supported with the expected EVPN multicast route behavior. Multicast in an IP-VRF (layer 3) context is not supported because kernel routing is not configured for that case.

[id="bgp-evpn-limitations_{context}"]
== Limitations

The following cluster networking features are incompatible with EVPN on primary CUDNs:

* Multiple external gateways (MEG). MEG requires shared gateway mode and EVPN is supported only in local gateway mode.
* EgressIP
* Egress Service
* IPsec encryption for OVN-Kubernetes
* No-overlay mode
* IPv6 VTEPs are not supported

[id="bgp-evpn-cudn-lifecycle_{context}"]
== Cluster user-defined network lifecycle

You enable EVPN by setting EVPN-related fields such as `spec.transport`, `spec.evpnConfiguration.vtep`, `spec.evpnConfiguration.macVRF.vni`, and optional route target settings on a primary `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` resource. 

> If you omit a route target, implementations can default it from your autonomous system number and VNI. 

Reviewer: `can` vs `will`? Subjective, but `can` sounded a bit weak of an statement.

You cannot retroactively enable EVPN on an existing CUDN whose specification is already immutable. You must plan EVPN when you create the network or create a new CUDN for EVPN workloads.

> For more information about `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` configuration fields for BGP EVPN, see the <cudn reference> section. 

Reviewer: Incomplete reference?

[id="bgp-evpn-custom-resources_{context}"]
== Custom resources involved in EVPN

The following custom resources are commonly used in an EVPN deployment:

`FRRConfiguration`:: Defines BGP peers, autonomous system numbers, and EVPN-related address-family configuration toward the provider fabric. Namespaced; used with FRR-K8s.

`VTEP`:: Describes Virtual Tunnel Endpoint parameters, for example, a CIDR and `managed` or `unmanaged` mode. 
+
In `managed` mode, OVN-Kubernetes creates and assigns a VTEP address from the range to each node. This is the default mode.
+

> In `unmanaged` mode, each node uses an address on the host that falls inside the CIDR. This can be configured with a `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` (NNCP) resource from the Kubernetes NMState Operator, if you use it.

Reviewer: It's `Managed` and `Unmanaged`

`Managed` won't be supported on GA, so users will have to explicitly specify `Unmanaged`. Not sure how to properly document this

Author: No problem. Kind of weird that it defaults to managed but that is unsupported. Either way, I've updated this. I'll also hide the "managed" portion of the procedure.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/advanced_networking/bgp_evpn_udn/about-bgp-evpn-user-defined-networks.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-bgp-evpn-about_{context}"]
= Overview of BGP EVPN with OVN-Kubernetes

[role="_abstract"]
Enabling Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) capability on {product-title} exposes primary `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` (CUDN) custom resources (CRs) (layer 2 and layer 3) externally through a VPN to other entities inside or outside of the cluster, providing an industry-standardized way to achieve network segmentation between sites.

Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) EVPN integration with primary CUDNs aligns tenant segmentation with existing BGP operations and reduces reliance on per-node static route configuration on hosts when you combine EVPN with route advertisements and local gateway mode. You can use BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs to deploy either VPN type that EVPN defines:

MAC-VRF:: Stretches a layer 2 segment across the EVPN fabric for east-west bridged traffic and workloads such as VM live migration.

IP-VRF:: Provides layer 3 routing across the EVPN fabric for routed north-south traffic.

> When you enable EVPN transport on a primary CUDN, VXLAN replaces Geneve as the overlay for traffic carried over the EVPN fabric. That avoids the double-encapsulation overhead of running Geneve inside an EVPN fabric. FRR acts as the BGP EVPN control plane and integrates with Linux network devices to provide the data plane. On layer 2 user-defined networks that do not use EVPN, east-west traffic commonly still uses Geneve.

Reviewer: Omit `On layer 2 user-defined networks that do not use EVPN, east-west traffic commonly still uses Geneve`. It's obvious and also true for any other network, not just layer 2.

Author: Removed.

Isolation for overlapping tenant networks:: Connect primary CUDNs that use overlapping address space to different external EVPN segments while preserving isolation between tenants.

[id="bgp-evpn-supported-platforms_{context}"]
== Platform support and feature compatibility

BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs is supported only on bare-metal clusters.

The following table lists the supported and unsupported features when EVPN is enabled on primary CUDNs.

.BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs feature compatibility
[cols="1a,1a",options="header"]
|===
^| Network feature ^| Supported

^| Egress firewall
^| Supported

^| Egress QoS
^| Supported

^| Network QoS
^| Supported

^| Network Policy / `AdminNetworkPolicy` resource
^| Supported

^| Services (Cluster IP)
^| Supported

^| Services (NodePort, External IP, LoadBalancer)
^| Limited^[1]^

^| KubeVirt Live Migration
^| Supported

^| Multicast (MAC-VRF)
^| Supported

^| Multicast (IP-VRF)
^| Unsupported

^| Multiple External Gateways (MEG)
^| Unsupported

^| EgressIP
^| Unsupported

^| Egress Service
^| Unsupported

^| IPsec
^| Unsupported

> 

Reviewer: I would remove: 
KubeVirt Live Migration -> this is just relevant for OpenShift Virtualization
AdminNetworkPolicy -> this is not supported, but not because of EVPN itself, AdminNetworkPolicy is not supported for UDNs in general.

Also, where is the note [1] pointing to? It should point to 
```
* For `Service` objects (NodePort, External IP, and LoadBalancer), the node IP, external IP, and LoadBalancer IP must be reachable on the EVPN fabric at the appropriate cluster nodes. OVN-Kubernetes does not advertise those addresses onto the fabric. Service traffic behaves normally when the fabric delivers packets to the nodes.
```

Author: Yes sorry; I've fixed this.

|===
--
. NodePort, External IP, and LoadBalancer services require local gateway mode. Shared gateway mode does not support these service types.

> --

Reviewer: This is not correct. Not sure where you got it from. Also, the note is not relevant, since the EVPN feature itself is local gateway mode only.

Author: I see how I messed up here; I need to document the Services limitations from line 895-898. Fixed this.

[id="bgp-evpn-limitations_{context}"]
== Limitations

The following limitations apply to BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs:

* BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs is supported only on bare-metal clusters.
* BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs is supported only in local gateway mode.

> * FRR version 10 or later is required for Single VXLAN Device (SVD) mode.

Reviewer: Remove this. OpenShift already integrates with an appropriate version of FRR and is not a concern for the user.

Author: Removed.

> * In SVD mode, a maximum of 4094 combined MAC-VRF and IP-VRF instances per `VTEP` applies because OVN-Kubernetes uses one shared VXLAN device per `VTEP`, maps VLAN IDs to VNIs on that device, and the Linux bridge VLAN space is limited to 4094.

Reviewer: Omit `In SVD mode`

Reviewer: Also, add a limitation mentioning that only IPv4 VTEPs are supported. This is a limitation on FRR which is the BGP control plane backend that we use.

Author: Added

* The VXLAN destination UDP port is 4789. Customizing the UDP port is not supported.

> * `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` object names must be fewer than 16 characters so that virtual routing and forwarding (VRF) naming is predictable on the node.

Reviewer: `must` is innacurate. If you want predictable VRF names, then they must. If you don't care, then it doesn't matter. But I would rather omit the full thing as it is not very relevant for downstream use cases right now.

Author: Removed.

Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) EVPN integration with primary CUDNs aligns tenant segmentation with existing BGP operations and reduces reliance on per-node static route configuration on hosts when you combine EVPN with route advertisements and local gateway mode. You can use BGP EVPN with primary CUDNs to deploy either VPN type that EVPN defines:

MAC-VRF:: Stretches a layer 2 segment across the EVPN fabric for east-west bridged traffic and workloads such as VM live migration.

IP-VRF:: Provides layer 3 routing across the EVPN fabric for routed north-south traffic.

When you enable EVPN transport on a primary CUDN, VXLAN replaces Geneve as the overlay for traffic carried over the EVPN fabric. That avoids the double-encapsulation overhead of running Geneve inside an EVPN fabric. FRR acts as the BGP EVPN control plane and integrates with Linux network devices to provide the data plane.

> This design does not model the cluster default pod network as an EVPN VPN. EVPN applies only to primary CUDNs that you configure for EVPN transport. EVPN on primary CUDNs requires and builds on the OVN-Kubernetes route advertisements feature. You use `RouteAdvertisements` custom resources to associate fabric-facing FRR configuration with labeled primary CUDNs that use EVPN transport. For more information, see "About route advertisements".

Reviewer: Not sure if ` see "About route advertisements"` is the correct way to reference other doc. I guess it will be post processed and a link added?

Author: @jcaamano This is unfortunately standard for our docs; this file is a module and we can't use cross reference links in modules. So users generally read ". . . see "About route advertisements" and then CTRL +F or go to the Additional Resources section, and the link is there. 

When we migrate to DITA and aren't in Github, this won't be a problem. But for now, this is standard and something we've always done.
